The Project Gutenberg eBook of Observation on the Use and Abuse of Mercury,
and on the Precautions Necessary in its Employment, by A. Philips Wilson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Observation on the Use and Abuse of Mercury, and on the
       Precautions Necessary in its Employment

Author: A. Philips Wilson

Release Date: August 8, 2021 [eBook #66016]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

Produced by: Donald Cummings and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team
             at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
             generously made available by The Internet Archive)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK OBSERVATION ON THE USE AND ABUSE
OF MERCURY, AND ON THE PRECAUTIONS NECESSARY IN ITS EMPLOYMENT ***




                             OBSERVATIONS
                                ON THE
                            USE AND ABUSE
                                  OF
                               MERCURY,
                                AND ON
                            THE PRECAUTIONS
                               NECESSARY
                          _IN ITS EMPLOYMENT_.

                            [Illustration]

                                  BY
                       A. PHILIPS WILSON, M. D.
      Fellow of the Royal College of Physicians, and of the Royal
                       Society of Edinburgh, &c.

                            [Illustration]

                              Winchester.
                  Printed and Sold by JAMES ROBBINS.

 Sold also by Messrs. CADELL and DAVIES, Strand; MURRAY, Fleet-street;
             and CROSBY and Co. Stationer’s Court, Ludgate
                             Hill, LONDON.

                            [Illustration]

                                 1805.




                           OBSERVATIONS, &c.


The following Observations are addressed to the Public, with a view,
on the one hand, to do away certain erroneous prepositions respecting
the effects of Mercury, which impede the necessary employment of it;
and on the other, to call its attention to the impropriety of an
indiscriminate use of this medicine, by which much harm is often done,
and the medicine itself brought into disrepute. The best way to effect
these purposes seems to be, to make the public acquainted with what
is really to be apprehended from an improper use of mercury, and the
circumstances in which its bad effects shew themselves; by which every
one may be enabled to distinguish these effects from such as proceed
from other causes, as well as be warned against a use of this medicine
which has become too prevalent.

Physicians will agree, that we do not possess a more valuable medicine
than mercury. Not to mention the diseases for the cure of which it was
first introduced, which, without its aid, almost uniformly prove fatal,
and in which it is almost uniformly successful, we may appeal for the
truth of this observation to its effects in some of the most dangerous
forms of scrophula, in dropsies of different kinds, in inflammations,
particularly chronic inflammations, and induration and enlargement of
the different viscera.[A]

[A] If we except worm cases, in which mercury probably acts on the
worms themselves, the various diseases in which mercury is useful,
may perhaps be reduced to the two heads of inflammation and glandular
obstruction. I believe there is nothing more erroneous than the
opinion, that mercury will occasionally succeed in almost all diseases.
This opinion has led to its employment in improper cases, and tended
consequently to bring it into discredit. I have never found it
successful except in the diseases here alluded to.

For many years after its introduction into practice, it was confined
to a few diseases. At length it occurred to physicians, that a remedy,
which in these proved so efficacious, might produce similar effects in
other cases; and such has been the success of the trial, that during
the last twenty years mercury has been coming into general use, with a
rapidity unequalled in the history of any other medicine. But the more
we are assured of its value, the more cautious we ought to be in its
employment; both because it is of the greater consequence to prevent
any prepossession against it, and because we know that there is no
active medicine which can safely be trifled with.

The prejudices which prevail against the use of mercury seem to arise
from three sources; the nature of the complaints in which it was
first employed; the uneasiness which even its salutary operation,
when carried to a certain extent, necessarily occasions; and the bad
consequences which sometimes attend an improper use of it. It is
surprising, that the first of these causes should operate against its
use; yet such is the confusion which naturally creeps into our ideas on
subjects in which we are not habitually interested, that the prejudices
of not a few originate from this cause. Of such a prejudice it is
surely unnecessary to say any thing. The other objections to the use
of mercury are of more weight.

Like all other medicines which increase the secretion by the skin,
the use of mercury tends to debilitate, and render the body more
susceptible of cold. When mercury does not encrease any other
excretion, the debility it occasions seems to be proportioned to the
degree in which it promotes perspiration; and medicines which promote
perspiration in a greater degree produce more sudden debility. We see
a degree of weakness produced by the operation of James’s powders, or
of Dover’s powders, (opium and ipecacuanha), in a few days which a
moderate course of mercury would not occasion in many weeks.

Such is the tendency of mercury to promote the secretion by the skin,
that it often runs off in this way almost as fast as it is received
into the system, particularly on its first being used; so that it
is sometimes difficult to make a sufficient quantity be retained to
produce its desired effect. Some of the good effects of mercury seem,
in a great measure, to arise from this action of it, particularly its
tendency to counteract the inflammatory disposition and to relieve
actual inflammation.

This tendency of mercury readily accounts for the bad effects of taking
cold under its influence. It is easy to conceive that the bad effects
of checking perspiration will be most felt when, to use a common
expression, the pores are most open, that is, when the secretion by
the skin is most copious; for the greater the quantity of fluid thus
discharged, the greater inconvenience is to be expected from suddenly
checking its secretion. Hence also the danger of suddenly checking
perspiration, when, by exercise or external warmth, it is rendered more
copious than usual.

Such is the admirable constitution of our bodies, that means are
provided for more or less successfully counteracting the operation
of every thing which tends to injure them. If a thorn or any other
extraneous body is introduced under the skin, inflammation and
suppuration spontaneously arise, by which the offending cause is
expelled. If a poisonous substance is received into the stomach, the
action of vomiting is frequently excited, or if it passes into the
bowels, nature still endeavours to carry it off by an increase of the
peculiar motion of the intestines, and of the secretion from their
surface; so in the case before us, the morbid fullness which would in
every instance arise, when perspiration suffers a check, is generally
prevented by the sympathy which subsists between the skin and several
other secreting organs, in consequence of which, as soon as a check
is given to the action of the former, some one of the latter, which
secrete a similar fluid from the blood, is called into more vigorous
action, and what should have passed by the skin is thrown off by the
kidneys or bowels, sometimes by the glands of the nose, throat, and
lungs, occasioning what we call a _cold_.

This substitution of one excretion for another, if I may use the
expression, is particularly apt to occur under the use of mercury, and
seems to arise from the nature of this medicine being so stimulating
that we cannot retain it in the system: if one vent is denied it, it
quickly finds another. Hence it is that people under the effects of
mercury are so subject to an increased secretion from the kidneys and
intestines, and from the glands of the mouth and throat.

It is of great consequence in most cases, in conducting a course of
mercury, as much as possible to prevent its running off, and as we
cannot wholly confine it, our plan is to direct it to that channel
thro’ which it passes off most slowly; for it is well known that
this and some other medicines, while they particularly excite any
one excreting organ, are not apt to pass off at the same time in
considerable quantity by any other. Now the channel by which mercury
passes off most slowly is the glands of the mouth, and fauces. Our
view, therefore, is generally to direct it to this channel, and the
degree in which it increases the secretion from these glands is a
sufficiently accurate measure of the quantity of mercury in the body,
as we generally find that the effects of mercury in removing disease
are proportioned to the degree in which it affects the mouth. Besides
the discharge, and consequently the debility, occasioned by the same
quantity of mercury, is less when it excites these glands, than when it
acts on the skin and bowels.

While it increases the secretion from the glands of the mouth and
fauces, it irritates and inflames them, and the inflammation it excites
when the quantity which passes in this way is great, often becoming
considerable and spreading to neighbouring parts, much uneasiness is
sometimes occasioned.

The symptoms of salivation form the chief of the bad effects, which
are peculiar to this medicine. They are indeed unpleasant, but they
are unattended with danger. It is rarely proper to induce them. A
physician may practice for several years without meeting with one
instance in which salivation is necessary; and the extent to which the
older practitioners were accustomed on every occasion to carry the use
of mercury, may be regarded as one of the greatest abuses which have
opposed the beneficial employment of this medicine. It has certainly
more than any other tended to confirm the prejudices against it. All
its good effects can in most cases be obtained by slightly affecting
the mouth, and keeping up this affection for a longer or shorter time,
according as the complaint proves more or less obstinate.

In certain formidable cases which, we have reason to believe, if left
to themselves would prove fatal, and in which more gentle means have
failed, it is proper to induce salivation. But may not a similar
objection be brought against the use of most other medicines? There
are few whose operation, is not attended with some inconvenience. How
alarming would be the operation of an emetic were we not accustomed to
see it! Violent vomiting is a symptom occasioned by some of the most
fatal poisons, yet we are easily reconciled to it when assured of its
beneficial tendency.

From what has been said, the reader will readily perceive, why a sudden
salivation is often the effect of taking cold under the operation
of mercury. We have no means of immediately checking a salivation.
Discontinuing the use of the mercury, employing gentle laxatives, and
avoiding every thing which tends to irritate the inflamed surface of
the mouth and fauces will lessen the inflammation and discharge, and by
degrees remove them.

When the mercury instead of falling on the glands of the mouth and
fauces, is thrown on the bowels in consequence of taking cold, it
is more in our power to regulate and restrain the discharge. For
the most part this affection of the bowels is a mere diarrhœa. The
griping pains which sometimes attend it seem to arise from the copious
secretion from the intestines washing off the mucus which is the
natural defence against the irritation of their contents. When this
affection is allowed to continue, and no care is taken to defend the
bowels, dysenteric symptoms sometimes shew themselves; these are most
frequently the consequence of mercury taken internally, as I shall
presently have occasion more particularly to observe.

This affection of the bowels may be induced in another way. It will
have nearly the same effect, whether the fluid, which should pass by
the skin is thrown on the bowels in consequence of the action of the
skin being checked by taking cold, or in consequence of this fluid
being directed to the bowels by any cause of irritation applied to
their surface. Hence it is, that indigestible and irritating food will
often produce such a change in the distribution of the fluids, that the
increased secretion by the skin or salivary glands, occasioned by the
mercury, shall be exchanged for that by the bowels.

When the mercury is thrown on the kidneys it passes off, as by the
skin, without uneasiness of any kind; and as in this case also, the
only bad consequences are, that the mercury, instead of acting on the
system for the cure of the disease for which it is given, is drained
from the body, and the patient is sometimes weakened by the increased
discharge. Mercury may, to a certain degree, be diverted from the
kidneys by the use of certain astringent medicines. Those which direct
it to the skin, by increasing the action of this organ, will divert it
from the kidneys; but by this we should lose, not gain, as it is thrown
off by the former more rapidly than by the latter.

In many cases the action of mercury on the kidneys is salutary, and
our aim is as much as possible, by the use of diuretic medicines, to
direct it to this channel; for it happens with respect to the kidneys,
as with respect to the bowels, that whatever tends to irritate and
increase the discharge from them, solicits the mercury to them. It is
partly in this way that it often proves a cure in various species of
dropsy.

       *       *       *       *       *

As far as we have considered the effects of mercury, its debilitating
tendency seems to arise from the evacuation it occasions. But it
debilitates in another way, which has not been sufficiently attended
to. Whatever weakens the stomach and bowels is soon felt in every part
of the system, and even medical men, as far as I can judge, are not in
general sufficiently aware of the bad effects which often arise from
the internal use of mercury. To prescribe calomel, one of the most
active preparations of this medicine, with the same freedom, and for
the same purposes, as rhubarb or senna, is in my opinion altogether a
misapplication of it.

Few things apply to the stomach and intestines a more hurtful
irritation. I have often seen temporary dysentery induced by a few
doses of calomel, and I am convinced from many cases that its habitual
or even occasional use as an aperient, however innocent it may seem at
the time, seldom fails at length to debilitate the powers of digestion,
and is often productive of still worse consequences. Calomel is
frequently given to children because it has little taste, and may be
given in small compass. But it is better to give a milder medicine,
tho’ a larger quantity may be required. Perhaps the smallness of the
quantity in which it operates is of itself a sufficient objection,
for there is no aperient which operates in very small quantity that
operates mildly, as we might have foreseen, although the trial had
not been made. For my own part, I know of few instances in which the
internal use of mercury seems proper. There are some cases where
powerful means are required to rouse the bowels to action, or a strong
stimulus applied to their exhaling vessels is beneficial; and mercury
is sometimes successfully employed internally for the removal of worms,
but in ordinary cases we can surely with equal advantage use a less
irritating medicine.

When mercury is not employed as an aperient, but for the purpose of
impregnating the system, what advantage is there in giving it by the
mouth. It seldom happens that we cannot give as much as we wish by
the skin. I have known many who were less debilitated by an ounce of
mercury taken by the skin, than by half a dram received even in the
smallest doses into the stomach.

In short, the objections to the use of mercury by the skin, seem all
to resolve themselves into the two above treated of, the debility
occasioned by an increase of some of the excretions, and a greater
susceptibility to the effects of cold.[B] While there are the same
objections to the internal use of mercury, there are far more weighty
ones, which are not the less so, because we cannot with the same
precision define them. All that we know of them is, that they chiefly
consist in a debility of the stomach and intestines, which gives rise
to the various dyspeptic complaints, flatulence, acidity, diarrhœa, and
dysentery, effects which I have so often witnessed from the internal
use of mercury, that I have for some years almost wholly abandoned it,
except in the cases above alluded to.

[B] It is unnecessary to notice a variety of groundless opinions,
respecting the effects of mercury, which prevail among the vulgar, that
it remains for ever in the system, causes a rottenness of the bones,
&c. These are similar to the prejudices which prevailed respecting the
bark for a long time after its introduction into practice, that it was
formed into masses in the stomach and bowels, from which it could never
be expelled; that nobody survived the use of it more than seven years,
&c.

The precautions suggested by what has been said will, I believe, in
every instance, prevent the bad effects of mercury, with the exception
of the symptoms of salivation, which it is now and then necessary to
induce. It will be proper to take a cursory view of these precautions.

       *       *       *       *       *

As by promoting the excretions, mercury tends to debilitate, it must be
used with caution in weak habits, and its debilitating effects should
be counteracted by the use of such strengthening medicines as are
adapted to the case in which we employ it. The debilitating effects of
mercury, however, are not such as many suppose. In a habit of ordinary
strength, a moderate course of mercury, properly conducted, produces
little debility, and I have seen many under such a course recover both
their strength and flesh. The mercury gives vigour, by removing the
cause which impairs it. With caution there is no danger in making a
trial of mercury in the most debilitated habit. In such the quantity
first employed should be too small to produce any effect whatever. Let
it be gradually increased; if, as often happens, the strength improves,
let it be continued; if the strength be much impaired by it, it should
be laid aside.

Nothing tends more to debilitate under the use of mercury, than the
unfortunate idea, that the patient should be denied the advantage of
free air and exercise. Under certain circumstances, confinement to
the house is proper. When it is necessary to induce salivation, the
patient should remain at home. The inconvenience, indeed, of going out
is sufficient to prevent it. Under even the gentlest course of mercury,
he should remain at home in damp cold weather, and after sun-set. With
these exceptions, he should be as much in the open air as his strength
will permit. It is not exposure to a cool, or even a cold air, that
checks perspiration. In a dry cold air, with a due degree of exercise,
the insensible perspiration is perhaps freer than under any other
circumstances. All that is necessary with respect to temperature is,
that it shall not be so low that the quantity of exercise, which the
patient can take without inconvenience, shall not be sufficient to keep
up a proper degree of heat.

All sudden changes of temperature, particularly that from warm to cold,
(which, notwithstanding the refinements of some modern philosophers,
may easily, I believe, be proved to be the most pernicious) are to be
guarded against. The same may be said of partial exposure to cold.
In short, it is not exposure to cold, but exposure to the causes of
what we call taking cold, that is injurious to those under the use of
mercury.

Strong exercises, I mean such as induce any degree of sensible
perspiration, and all kinds of fatigue, are hurtful.

All indigestible and irritating articles of food should be avoided
by those under the influence of mercury, both because it is proper,
under the use of all medicines which promote the excretions, to avoid
whatever debilitates, and because every thing that irritates the bowels
tends to solicit a more copious secretion from them, and thus to divert
the mercury from the channel, to which it is our aim to direct it. On
this account much wine, strong and high seasoned food, and whatever
tends to produce flatulence and acidity, are injurious.

The diet, however, should not be low, as was once recommended under
the use of mercury, which, combined with the confinement, tended to
produce the greater part of the debility attributed to the effects
of the medicine. It should be nourishing, mild, and in some degree
mucilaginous. Wine should be drank in preference to every other kind of
fermented liquor. The stronger wines should be diluted. The quantity
should be moderate, but proportioned to the patient’s habits.


                                FINIS.


JAMES ROBBINS, Printer, Winchester.




 Transcriber’s Notes:

 ――Text in italics is enclosed by underscores (_italics_).

 ――Punctuation and spelling inaccuracies were silently corrected.

 ――Archaic and variable spelling has been preserved.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK OBSERVATION ON THE USE AND ABUSE OF
MERCURY, AND ON THE PRECAUTIONS NECESSARY IN ITS EMPLOYMENT ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
