The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Dream-God, by John Cuningham

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: The Dream-God
       or, A Singular Evolvement of Thought in Sleep

Author: John Cuningham

Release Date: August 8, 2021 [eBook #66009]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

Produced by: Tim Lindell, David E. Brown, and the Online Distributed
             Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was
             produced from images generously made available by The Internet
             Archive/American Libraries.)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE DREAM-GOD ***




  THE DREAM-GOD,

  OR

  A SINGULAR EVOLVEMENT
  OF
  THOUGHT IN SLEEP.

  BY JOHN CUNINGHAM.

  NEW YORK:
  PRINTED FOR THE AUTHOR BY
  ANDERSON & RAMSAY.
  28 FRANKFORT STREET.




  Entered according to act of Congress, in the year 1873, by
  JOHN CUNINGHAM,
  In the office of the Librarian of Congress at Washington.




TO MY FRIENDS.


_Although requested by a number of you at various times to write this
condensed narrative of an event in my life, associated with much
misfortune, sadness and suffering which have continued for some years,
it was not until during a lonely period of quietude at Brooklyn, N.
Y., in the summer of 1872, that I made the effort. I do not expect the
public to give much credence or interest to the matter, but to you who
know me I can trustingly give the assurance that this little book is an
unaffected and truthful production. It is published as an affectionate
memorial to you of mutual esteem and friendship._

                                                     JOHN CUNINGHAM,
                                                            _of So. Ca._

  APRIL, 1873.




A SINGULAR EVOLVEMENT OF THOUGHT IN SLEEP.


A REMARKABLE DREAM.

The peculiar and startling effect of morphine on a person unaccustomed
to its administration, was happily illustrated in the instance of a
gentleman to whom, under its influence, (about three eighths of a
grain,) the dream to be related occurred. This individual, (a South
Carolinian resident on a plantation,) a few years ago, had lately
received a severe and extensive burn, which confined him to his bed six
months. An allusion by him in a casual conversation in the city of New
York recently to the eventful dream and its circumstances, brought out
a solicitation to him to write its narrative, which in substance he
here gives.

One evening in midwinter, a few weeks after the accident, the almost
exhausted sufferer, having taken the prescribed nightly dose of
morphine, fell asleep.




THE DREAM-GOD.




PART I.


The sleep was serene, the mind active, and the dream promptly and
vividly supervened. A being in the form of a handsome and matured man,
full of _esprit_, in a white and easy-fitting garment, with bright,
broad and sweeping wings coming out from each side of his back below
the shoulders, appeared to the patient at his bedside, and announced to
him that he was the Spirit of Morphine, of a heavenly and _immortal_
nature, and that he had come to carry him on an aerial voyage over many
parts of the world; to show him many attractive regions and things,
to introduce him to various races, royal personages, distinguished
celebrities, etc.

The sleeper with surprise inquired, “How can I go with this stricken
and impotent body?”

The Immortal replied, “You must leave your body here; your spiritual
being can accompany me.”

_Sleeper._--“But I fear that before my return my friends may see and
regard my inanimate body as dead, and bury it.”

_Immortal._--“Fear not. I will restore you in due time to your body;
and I will prepare you for our adventures as I am prepared.”

Thus assured, the somnipathist crept gently out, headway, from his
“mortal coil,” glided over the headboard of his bedstead, glanced back
upon his sleeping frame in his very image, then sprang lithely to the
sill of the window, where the sash had already been thrown up by the
Morpheus, and finding himself equipped with needed dress and wings,
soared with his companion into the air.

_Immortal._--“What route do you prefer?”

_Mortal._--“I wish to have a birdseye view of Charleston, (once my
home,) by gas-light and then toward the Arctic Pole.”

The aerial _voyageurs_ were, as if in a moment, hovering in a slow,
scrutinizing flight over Charleston, with stars above, and looking
as upon stars below; and in front, athwart the ocean, a long line
of light, gleaming from a newly-risen moon, invited their quickened
pinions into the illimitable spaces over the far-bounded deep. Curving
in a wide ocean-sweep northward, and moving with lightning-speed, they
perceived, although having a full sense of comfort, varying currents
of icy gales and warm breezes; and from their transparent height
saw beneath them the dark, girdling strata of cyclone hurricanes,
or sheeny, swathe-clouds of crystal congelations; or, within their
extended girdles, broad, oval areas of clear-rolling sea, and far down,
by a peculiar dim lighting of its depths, the plains, hills and vales
it immersed, and the myriad tribes of the deep in their amazing animate
forms.

_Mortal._--“I would see the borealis.”

_Immortal._--“You shall, anon.”

The dream seemed to change. The parties suddenly found themselves
lying in open sea-shells, structured to their lengths and sizes,
floating side by side on a tranquil waste of waters, feet foremost,
heads pillowed, and eyes bent upward and northward. A lowered and
murky sky appeared as a dun-colored ceiling, of little height above
them; and they were thoughtful, and in low tones they occasionally
uttered weird thoughts on life--mankind--earth--God. A drowsy moment
ensues. Then slowly lifts the gloomy canopy, and along the distant
northern horizon, the fog having rapidly disappeared, a lengthened
arc of whitish light spans itself. The heavens are again clear. From
the bright arc dart upward along their northern hemisphere radiant
streams of every lighter hue, and in incessant changeful brilliancy--a
panoramic spread of incandescent splendors. A whirl of cold, shimmering
light dashes around and over towering icebergs, and amazes the eye. It
closes, and when again it opens, the Arctic travellers find themselves
soaring aloft, and they look upon an open, calm, unfrozen polar sea.[A]
The Spirit of Morphine remarks: “You now see, and will see, things
unknown to man. This comparative warmth comes from the fire and glowing
heat in the bowels of the earth, as you will soon ascertain.”

They move on; they are at the Pole; the north star is in the zenith. A
magnetic needle appears hanging in mid-air, like the visioned dagger
before Macbeth, and dips southward and westward toward the other--the
magnetic--pole, degrees away. A glare disturbs the eye, and terrible
sounds surround them. Behold! the Pole is a large cylindrical aperture
(miles in diameter) in our globe, down through which are seen the
molten mass and fiery flame within the crust of earth! The watery
billows, like a whirlpool, surge in loud roar around its circumferent
shore, but enter not; and a column of heat ever rushes on the Arctic
air.

A cry of terror and awe escapes from the sleeper. He is conscious of
it, but does not awake. The dream resumes.

They are now flying southward, and the somnipathist has a vision (a
dream in this dream) of a midsummer circling sun shining a day of
months. They view the peculiarities of Iceland, examine the maelstrom,
(that singular natural wonder, gurgitating into another earth-aperture,
off Norway,) and comprehend by a glance Lapland, Norway and Sweden,
their curiosities, peoples, customs, etc. There is not time or space
for details. They are _en voyage_ for the Court of Russia.

They alight at the Winter Palace of the Czar.

The Immortal with his pupil enters with free and commanding
port--obstructions vanish. A festive scene of splendor--gayety, glitter
and ceremony commingled--is at its height. Through the maze of an
amazed, gorgeous, throng, they advance to the Emperor, surrounded
by rank and beauty; and through the influence of a celestial majesty
more enthralling than his own, they secure his deferential and cordial
attention. Then follows a confused but charming association with
“beautiful women and brave men,” amid all social bewitcheries.

The scene changes. They are seated in a small ice-crystal[B] _salon_,
glistening on all sides except the carpeted floor, with the Emperor and
his prime minister alone, all exhilarant with wine, and now sipping
the potent subtlety of China’s most famed and fragrant tea, priced at
its weight in gold. The philosophy of government, from a republican
standpoint, rushes upon the soul of the American, and he exclaims to
the mighty potentate of all the Russias:

“How can your humanity conscientiously hold and wield the power of
imperial despotism?”

_Emperor._--“The one-man power in the light and dignity of a
_principle_, appeals to reason and fascinates the soul. It is the true
theory of human government. I am God’s vicegerent, as king and priest,
for the well-being and good order of my people.”

_Prime Minister._--“This system derives its type from the One-God
control of the universe. It has divinity from above, it has patriarchal
sanction here below. It can bear comparison with its opposite extreme
in absolutism--a pure democracy, the mere many-power, unrestrained,
unregulated and uninstructed. What is more irresponsible, more
selfishly callous, more heedlessly unstable, and more grinding than the
vulgar tyranny of a bare popular majority? Extremes meet and have a
singular affinity; it is the secret of the growing friendship between
Russia and the United States.”

_American._--“Ha! Our American people are not a mass democracy. The
United States are republics federated under a Constitution--a system
which excludes both your extremes.”

_Prime Minister._--“Indeed!”

_Immortal._--“There is a golden mean for all finite governments.
Uncontrolled power is only for the Infinite.”

_Emperor._--“Is even political self-government a _right_?”

_American._--“Surely mankind is entitled to it and should possess it.”

_Immortal._--“No! Self-government is the eventual prize of intelligence
and virtue. The ignorant or vicious are incapable of it. In the
meantime, it is the _privilege_ of the human race to secure it by
attempered wisdom, and to guard it against the passions and ignorance
of the many, the few, or the one. Goodness in the use of power, more
than the form of government, is the great desideratum. Seek most to
elevate the mind and heart of man!”

_American_ to _Emperor_.--“Sire! it is then your best mission to _do
well your part_!”




PART II.


Farewells are spoken. The _voyageurs_ are again a-wing. They reach the
Arctic along the vast Siberian coast. There the cold is most intense,
and of the frozen regions it is the wildest and grandest. A shimmering
light seems to permeate it ever, even in its darkest periods. The
ice presents plains, abysses, mountains. Everywhere are the débris
of long-frozen animals. Over its dry waste of congealed waters, the
fierce blasts, as if by frictional action on its rugged surfaces, ever
generate electrical phenomena. In midwinter and darkness, scintillating
flashes gleam along them in the nether air. Such was their vision.

The disembodied, as one startled, exclaims: “See yon iceberg like a
mountain of glass. What is that within it? It resembles the carcass of
a dead animal, but it is too huge. It is at least sixty feet long, and
of elephantine proportions.”

_Immortal._--“It is an ancient specimen of the behemoth (B’Hemoth)
tribes. Its species is extinct. Its bulk is many times that of
the mastodon. Its massive ivory tusks are similar to those of the
walrus. Its remains have been frozen in there for thousands of years.
Putrescence is here unknown.”

_Mortal._--“What wonders! Can this be nature?”

_Immortal._--“We are approaching others.”

_Mortal._--“Yes, look! What a vast lizard or crocodile yonder
encased--five hundred feet long! But I see fins, also.”

_Immortal._--“It is of the primeval species of _sauroid_ fish. It
has been frozen during cycles of time. This region was once warmer.
Nature’s changeful developments are a curious mystery to man, but it
ever unfolds in increasing knowledge.”

They wheel southward--anon traverse Chinese Tartary--sweep over the
Chinese wall, and alight in Pekin. They poise themselves on a lofty
pagoda.

_Mortal._--“These Chinese are a mysterious people. I am curious about
them. That wall was a great enterprise in its day, and a singular one.”

_Immortal._--“They are a swarm from an ancient human hive, and have
long been numerous and astute. They have been, and are superior to
the average of mankind, but inferior to the more illumined and most
cultivated. Their numbers and limited geographic sphere have made
them feel want; yet their inventions, although multiplied, have been
petty, fanciful, crude and clumsy contrivances to meet emergency, in
comparison with the grander discoveries and more studied and beautiful
designs of other and higher civilizations. _Necessity_ has stimulated
their cunning, but precludes their reflection; it has pinched their
faculties, as the ‘iron shoe’ has their feet. Their mental contraction
has been rendered more compressive by their moral and spiritual
defects. They have had no conception of a God, _per se_. It is the
conception which most expands man!”

_Mortal._--“But this pagoda (truly it is a grotesque structure!) is a
temple devoted to some worship.”

_Immortal._--“It is a fane of the merest idolatry, and dedicated to
idols, ‘of the earth, earthly,’ not to any images which are even
typical of divine _essences_. But of this, anon.”

_Mortal._--“The Chinese have, however, a demi-god--their ‘Celestial
Emperor.’”

_Immortal._--“Yes, he is their immediate authority, temporal and
spiritual. Yet he and his mandarins, alike with his subjects, are
constrained, by the dominancy of twenty-four centuries of veneration
for the great Chinese philosopher and moralist, Koong-Foo-tse,
(latinized, Confucius,) to worship in the temples dedicated to that
extraordinary statesman and expounder. This pagoda is one of these
temples, which have been reared in all chief cities and towns.
His ‘nine books’ constitute the creed and code--the bible--of the
‘Celestial Empire,’ and you will deem it a singular fact that they
contain no mention of a Creator--no allusion to God.”

_Mortal._--“It is indeed strange for so intelligent a people. All other
peoples have some kind of a belief and worship of a Supreme Being.
Hark! I hear sounds from below--I hear chants!”

_Immortal._--“Yes, they are from the Emperor and his court, performing
idol-service, offering fruits, wines, flowers and fancy articles, and
now singing chants. We will witness their return to the palace, and
then visit them.”

Soon the vision embraced a scene of Oriental pomp--a pageant, with
its ceremonies, gorgeous displays and vain-glorious crudities. This
narrative must dispense with the description, nor could the reader be
made to receive the impression produced on the visitor from the West,
while gazing on the dramas of the East.

His Celestial Majesty--“brother of the sun and cousin of the stars”--is
now enthroned in his extended residence, amid princely persons,
political potentates and priestly dignitaries, surrounded by every
burnishment and administered to by varied flattery and all servility.
The _voyageurs_ suddenly appear before and among them.

_Emperor._--“Ha! what means this intrusion? Chamberlain of the Palace,
accursed Mandarin! you shall lose your life for this. How came these
persons into the Celestial Presence without permission and the salaam
reverences? Hold! they have wings! Can they be Celestial? Spirit of
Koong-Foo-tse! come, protect, guard us! Let all the great gongs be
beaten! let dreadful sounds frighten them away!”

The Immortal, with a gesture, awes all into silence and composure.

_American to Emperor._--“Man, what mean these presumptions? What does
your ridiculous and despotic power claim?”

_Emperor._--“Not read the ‘Books!’ Read them. My power is immemorial
and supreme. Yang and Yn, time and Koong-Foo-tse have founded it--yes,
founded it on the analogy of parental authority, which they declare
absolute. The nation is my family, and I am its father. I am sole
entitled ruler, and I am--holy and sacred! Nor will I have contact with
strangers and barbarians.”

_American._--“What means he? What of Confucius?”

_Immortal._--“Confucius was a Chinaman, who lived 550 years before
Christ. He was a teacher of morals, rather than a founder of religion.
For those dark ages, he was an extraordinary man; he was great as
a philosopher, a moralist and a statesman. He made no pretence to
inspiration. He inculcated the training of the physical system. The
five elements, fire, water, wood, metal and earth (he called them
_Kings_) were the basis of his system of philosophy. He maintained that
the universe was generated by the union of two _material_ principles--a
heavenly and an earthly--Yang and Yn--but there is no mention of a
Creator in his system. Man, he asserted, fell from purity and happiness
by his own act; and by his own act he can or must recover them. His
political system, which is one of pure despotism, has been give by the
Emperor. Spirit of Koong-Foo-tse, come forth!”

The apparition of Confucius here takes visible shape, and startles the
assembly. The other or American immaterialized human, addresses him:

“Confucius, thy soul has now learned wisdom. How is it, that in life
your great reason did not perceive and conceive that there must be and
was a Being, all wise, all powerful, all good, eternal, and with His
infinity universally present--the God and Creator?”

_Confucius._--“_I had no revelation!_”

_Immortal._--“Creation itself suggests and proves a Creator; it is His
greatest revelation. The dual-elements in man (mind and matter,) should
recognize His existence and essence.”

_Confucius._--“I dimly perceived that there were _two_ principles, but
not precisely those of good and evil. _I did not reason sufficiently at
large. I thought only of earth, not of religion; of the material, not
the divine._ Zoroaster surpassed me in these regards.”

_American._--“Emperor, the hand-writing of destroying Fate is on your
wall. The hands of hundred of millions will pull it down. God will
send light, by the invading influence of the ‘outside barbarians’ of
the far West, to scatter the darkness from your land. Your dynasty is
doomed.”

The spectre of Confucius nods confirmation, and disappears.

The _voyageurs_ pass out, and soar into the air.

Intense cimmerian darkness now seems to prevail everywhere, and the
aerialists see themselves, as it were from a distance, flying as
illumined transparent shapes through it. Afar off, and in another land,
there is seen a small luminous spot on the horizon.

“What is yon bright object?”

“It is the ‘Temple of the Sun.’”

The speed of thought brings them to its full view. They swoop down; and
pause in riveted contemplation of the sublime pile.

What a house, built by supposed hands! It is a structure from masses
of the purest crystal; a mile long; two-thirds of a mile broad; a
half-mile high to its eaves. A steeple, itself of a mile’s height
and of beautiful proportions, towers with a superb aplomb a mile and
a half above its front base. It is radiant with a whitish internal
illumination, that shoots its apex of light upward to the dark
empyrean. Over a central point of the temple, a third distance from
its rear, a lofty dome uplifts in grand majesty its imposing symmetry,
and from which hangs pendent within, a vast globular light resembling
and sacred to the sun, permeating and illuming with its golden rays
the mighty mass. The double-tinted splendor of the _tout ensemble_,
thrilled with rapture even an immortal soul! Above the dome, and from a
staff like the lightning’s streak, floated a tri-colored _oriflamme_--a
rainbow flag.

  “One tint was of the sunbeam’s dyes,
  “One the blue depth of seraph’s eyes,
  “One, the pure spirit’s veil of white
  “Had robed in radiance of its light;
  “The three so mingled did beseem
  “The texture of a heavenly dream.”

The occasion is a holy period to a people in southern Asia, of whom
tens of thousands throng the columned interior. The flying visitors
enter. Their eyes are instantly attracted upward to the high-vaulted
ceiling, appearing like a slightly concaved sky, and of a deep cerulean
hue, studded with stars (mystic phenomenon!) as if in deference to
night.

In the centre of the vast tessellated floor is a colossal opalescent
human statue, typical of and dedicated to the God of Light, seated
on a purple throne bordered with plates of gold--the whole eight
hundred feet high, and the figure in a commanding attitude, and as
dispensing wisdom and exacting reverence. A space around it is paled
by a balustrade of sapphire. Behind it, on the wall to the East, is
pictured in marvellous glory the rising sun. In its front, outside
the sapphire enclosure and toward an entrance in the West, is a broad
low altar of polished granite. On it are piled votive offerings of
flowers--creatures of the sun.

Emblematic frescoes of light in varying hues, play over and adorn every
portion of the wondrous edifice.

The countless throng pressing from many entrances, with faces turned
upward to the Idol, and with odorless flambeaux aloft in their right
hands, chanted,

  “Fire! Genial Fire! Glorious Fire!
  Element of light! Hail, Father Sun!”

The flying companions had already taken their station in the space
reserved around the Colossus, and near his feet.

_Immortal._--“This has degenerated into Fire Worship--another form
of Materialism. The wretches adore the emblems, but know not their
meaning. Silence! Attention!!”

The people in awe put their left hands over their eyes, and kneel with
bowed heads. All the lights, large and small, become dim and wan; an
ominous twilight prevails.

_Immortal._--“Zoroaster, in the name of Light appear!”

The apparition of Zoroaster stands before them.

_Immaterialized American._--“I have heard of him, but what of him?”

_Immortal._--“Zoroaster or Zurdusht was a great thinker, who lived in
primeval times; computed by Aristotle to be about six thousand years
before the death of Plato. He was born in ancient Bactria. He was
the founder of the Magian religion, which prevailed long before the
Medo-Persian monarchy. His doctrines are set forth in the book called
_Zendavesta_. The _first being_ (according to that transcript) is
denominated ‘Time without bounds;’ thus showing on the part of Zurdusht
a vague perception of the Eternal One. His creed maintains that from
the operation of this ‘infinite Time,’ the two active principles of the
universe were produced from all eternity, Ormuzd (representing _good_)
and Ahriman, (representing _evil_,) each disposed to exercise his
_powers_ of _creation_ in different ways. The first formed man capable
of virtue; the latter, changed into _darkness_ from _light_, introduced
evil.”

“Zurdusht taught that, at the last day, Ormuzd would triumph.”

_American._--“I see. Zoroaster compared the _two principles_ to Light
and Darkness, and to each attributed _creative_ power. And now that I
reflect, I note that dual-elements of some kind, material or spiritual,
and associated with the idea of _good_ and _evil_, are averred in most
religious creeds. It is the great mystery!”

_Immortal._--“Zurdusht, speak!”

_Zoroaster._--“Death further opened my finite eyes. There are not _two
discordant essences_ nor TWO CREATIVE POWERS. The One God is the One
Creator. He alone can solve the inscrutability of Evil.”

The lights die out. Sounds cease. The temple disappears. Utter darkness
ensues. A sudden murmured exclamation of wonder arises from countless
beings, enshrouded in the night. The Heavens above have opened; an
amazing glory of radiance shines through them, amid which “the great
White Throne” and “He who sitteth thereon” are seen, and His resounding
voice utters to the Universe: I AM THE LIGHT!




PART III.


This dream had one feature in common with ordinary dreams; parts of it
were confused and fitful. But its unusual length and coherence were
remarkable. It consisted of a series of vivid scenes and singular
events in conformity with its general character and design. These were
announced (a notable fact) in its outset, and sustained throughout
(still more strange) in their appropriate relations.

The aerial _voyageurs_ took a general view of the Ganges and its
deltas. They paused to observe a Hindoo maiden, of the better _caste_,
launch upon its waters, in her amative superstition, one of those
small lights, votive to love and imagination, which floating down the
stream would by its course, accidents and fate, indicate what might be
the chequered destiny of her affections, or the fortunes of an absent
lover. And they noticed her as a specimen of the delicate symmetry of
form and sentient beauty of face, characteristic of southern Asiatic
females. The dreamy expression of soul on her countenance enthralled
the American. For a time he was human.

Geographical details but seldom attracted their attention. Their
general consciousness was that of travelling at night; yet there was
ever light enough when and where it was desired. The American conceived
the mortal wish to view a scene from the highest mountains in the
world. They were near the Himmalayas, and flew to their most commanding
peak. It appeared to be a bright day, and all the sensations of sublime
awe and admiration which a man could feel under such circumstances were
realized. This experience was entirely distinct from any impressions
produced during their usual aerial observations. The landscape seemed
to comprise every variety of object, from the grandest and most
startling, to the softest and most serene, and a delicious mellowing
sublimated the enchantment.

Now, anon, they are looking down upon the Euphrates and the Tigris,
and the classic slip of land between them. And in another moment a
twilight envelopes them, a contemplative mood ensues; and, then,
steals upon their consciousness the knowledge, inducing a singular awe
or uneasiness, that they are hovering over the Plain of Shinar. The
biblical Babel, the confusion of tongues and the scattering of the
nations crowd upon their reflection, and again immortal thoughts arise.

The disembodied remarks, “It is written that a drama occurred below,
which, it appears to me, is as mysterious in its meaning as it is
wonderful in its happening. The Divine frustration of the building of
the Tower of Babel, as a rebuke to the presumption of man, in the light
of an allegory, finds analogies in every-day life. But, as a fact, it
is classed among the miraculous. Which is it? The unity or variety of
origin of the human race is a vexed question; and man’s distinctiveness
from other animals, especially in the characteristics of reason and
immortality, may be regarded another. It has occurred to me that
attributing the ‘confusion of tongues’ to the miraculous, may have been
but an ancient priestly, as well as theoretic, pretext in favor of
the doctrine of the unity of the human race. The Babel statement is a
strange story of God’s ways.”

_Immortal._--“Even to immortals, God’s designs are not revealed, and
in many respects His ways are inscrutable. The past may declare His
nature, but never wholly His purposes. THE FUTURE IS HIS OWN. But as
His laws are unchangeable, inferences may be drawn by any being in
proportion to his faculties and knowledge. Their gradations are as
numerous as the stars. Nor is it permitted to _me_ to declare to _you_
in your mortal _status_, all I know in my immortal _status_. But the
unity or variety of human origin is of no present importance. The
differences of the human races, in language, color and structure, give
assurance against their amalgamation and homogeneity on earth.”

The dream assumes a new phase. In a grand hall, of shadowy sides,
suspended in mid-air, the parties recline in voluptuous chairs.

It is as if fitted for exhibitions. A moving superb panorama passes
before them, representing in their greatest glory, the following
cities: Babylon, Nineveh, Thebes, Troy, Tyre, Jerusalem, Bagdad,
Alexandria and Damascus. They alike saw them and seemed to be in them.
It was a curious, instructive and wondrous display. A reverse movement
of the picture then presented these cities or their sites as they are
now. Their inhabitants at the different periods, in varied masses
and actions, and male and female in every style and hue of Eastern
costume and countenance, created a strange and absorbing interest. The
kaleidoscopic phases of human nature will ever challenge curiosity,
excite observation and engender thoughts. The desire “to see and be
seen” by our kind, has a more suggestive and philosophical source than
mere vanity.

The winged adventurers of a night recross from Asia to Europe, traverse
the famed Bosphorus, and reaching Constantinople, alight for a moment,
each on a minaret of the mosque, (formerly church of St. Sophia,) the
grandest temple to Mahomet and of the Turks. The view was grand, novel
and crowded with objects and memorials. It was the most noted point on
the line between the East and the West, and there were the remembrances
and insignia of both. These philosophic observers had carefully
noticed, of late, the influences and traces of men and events, systems
and creeds, times and powers, from Alexander the Great, in his primary
institution of commerce and in its mighty effects, down to the
condition produced by the late struggle by Turkey, France and England
on one side, against the aggressions of Russia and Northern hordes on
the other.

With their usual facility they next visit the palace of the Sultan.
Their presence surprised, but its character was deferred to and
welcomed. Turkish hospitality and courtesy are genial, when once
enlisted. The Grand Vizier himself directed their entertainment near
the person of his Majesty of the Crescent. In a stoical manner,
but with liberal temper, they discussed with the guests matters of
religion, government, social customs, moral subtleties and modern
developments and tendencies. The preconceived ideas and prejudices of
the American were greatly modified. The former Turk and Mohammedan of
haughty bigotry, fierceness and the sword, had subsided into tolerance
for the Christian, amity with the European, and deference to the
civilization, learning and powers of the Caucasian race. Once the chief
guardian and lookout on the ramparts of the ignorance, despotism and
superstitions of the East, he now would open its portals to the more
active spirit and mightier enlightenment of the West. All this was
elicited and defined in the harmonious discussions that interluded the
ceremonial observances.

The suite of apartments allotted to females in the larger
dwelling-houses of the East (called the Harem) is a portion sacred
to them and the head of the family, and forbidden to other masculine
intrusion. But, for the winged spirits, there was no objection to
their admittance to even the imperial Seraglio. Upon the invitation of
the Sultan, who led the way, they retired with him into the delicious
abode of the Sultanas and lady favorites of that mysterious Court.
Here for the first time gallantry so inspired the American that he
bowed, kneeled--yes, salaam-ed! This choice collection of beautiful
women, selected from beauties of different climes, and from races of
the higher types, presented every species of female loveliness in
form, feature and complexion. The Circassian prevailed in numbers and
attractions.

A golden-haired blonde from the North, with seraphic blue eyes and
lily skin, robust yet lithe and sprightly, was evidently the favorite
of the Sultan. But in contrast with her style, yet equal in subtle
fascination, reclined upon a divan in more haughty retiracy a tropical
being, (a near relative of the Sultan,) in whose hair was the sheeny
darkness of a thousand starry nights, on whose brunette cheek was the
rose’s richest red, and whose flashing black eyes and queenly figure
were now in dreamy repose. But they grew animated on the entrance and
in the presence of the party; and during their stay and devoirs, her
look often rested on the American, “and eyes looked” affinity “to eyes
that spoke again.” He became enthralled. His imagination conjectured in
her the contrarient higher qualities of a Semiramis, a Cleopatra and a
Zenobia. She filled it!

At an appropriate time, eunuchs from among the number in attendance,
conducted the guests to private apartments. The American dreamed he
slept and had a vision.

The warm radiance of Zulika’s black eyes still thrill his soul with a
loving passion. Mahomet, too, was associated with her in his thoughts.
He calls upon him to come and take him among the celestial Houris--“the
beautiful eyed--the black eyed.” The apparition of Mahomet is suddenly
seen; it somewhat startles, yet, also, composes his other excitement.

_Mahomet._--“Brother disembodied! You are still human in your thoughts.
Death alone can free you from them. Yet I know them; it is permitted
to _me now to learn what transpires in the universe_. It is also
vouchsafed to you, in your immaterialized state, to hold converse with
the departed spirits, yes, even the Houris, as you request. Among other
matters you wonder at the apparently inconsistent decrees I made in
regard to wine and women, for my followers on earth. The inhibition of
wine was for the masses, who are largely composed of the inconsiderate
and craving. Its use will induce the habit and disease of intoxication,
which is fatal to mankind, especially in warm climates. Temperance
should ever be a moral duty, and abstinence alone can secure it among
the many. ‘The joys of wine’ are only for the prudent and thoughtful,
and its healthful quality for the ill. It has its proper uses.”

_Disembodied._--“In this regard you were right, as an expounder.”

_Mahomet._--“In permitting polygamy and even concubinage to some, I
reflected that as marriage would not be suitable or convenient or
possible to a number of men, I would be making a needful, wise and
saving provision for surplus women. The deprivation of wine, too,
rendered it more salutary; man will have one, and if he can, both. My
system was, also, designed to diminish promiscuous prostitution.”

_Disembodied._--“Clever excuse! But how will you defend the propagation
of your creed by the sword?”

_Mahomet._--“Mankind, so generally stolid or perverse in untoward
ignorance or selfishness, will usually require more or less coercion in
some shape, to be aroused into useful animation and effort, and to the
pursuit of good and happiness. The sword, like necessity, stimulates;
it is at times a great vivifier. It is even, occasionally, justice on
a large and peculiar scale; it is for man and nations, what the rod is
for the child.”

_Disembodied._--“Clever pretext, again! But you seem _now_ to think
that you were a better giver of law than of religion.”

_Mahomet._--“I was not a Prophet. I was right in but one religious
dogma: the declaration of the one God. And of Him, man is to himself
the most direct and proximate revelation. _Know thyself!_ It is both
duty and instruction. Come! sister spirits would confer with thee.”

_Disembodied American._--“But, oh, I would see more of _her_ whom I met
to-night.”

_Mahomet._--“She is your _affinity_; and when you are both freed
from the earthly, you will abide together on some Olympus in the
Illimitable. Let us to the Seventh Heaven!”

They sweep upward and onward, and on their passage see a vast and
bright globe, (a star or sun,) many times larger than the Earth. There
they see the souls of the most ignorant and obtuse of the dead, in
their second stage of existence or ordeal of improvement. It is the
first Heaven. They proceed on by other worlds--all abodes of Spiritual
Progression, and arrive at the seventh Heaven.

_Mahomet._--“The more favored and self-elevating of Earth when they
die, are at once transferred to the sphere most suited to them--some
few even reaching the sixth Heaven, at the outset upon eternity.
The seventh Heaven is the _first_ abode of achieved Goodness and
translucent Reason in the initial state of perfection. After and
beyond that, these become identical with Knowledge, which I believe
is eternally acquisitive and expansive. Here is my attainment through
centuries. I began my after-death career in the third Heaven. Zoroaster
his in the fourth. Confucius was permitted to pass the first, because
of his great mind and good intent; but he was assigned to the second to
learn there was a God and a Creator. Your travelling companion, who was
never mortal, is beyond me, and I know not his origin. Here I will show
you the most glorified women, who have come originally from earth.”

On the globe at which they had arrived, there was, as on Earth, all
variety of its own kinds or peculiarities.

The disembodied American was soon thrown into social intercourse. The
inhabitants appeared to have the human form glorified--called “the
image of God.” Here there was ideal beauty, infinitely varied like
the flowers of earth. The females were of heavenly and indescribable
loveliness. Their countenances beamed with sublimated purity and
affection. They thronged around him as “administering angels.” Their
sweet voices accompanied the music of the spheres, and their swelling
chorus joined the song of the morning stars, in the eternal anthem to
the Most High.

_Heavenly Houri._--“Mortal! Know that thy thought is vain, that
the passions of the body--of the earth--are here in some riper and
heaven-ized existence, and that their indulgence is but enhanced in
pleasurable degree. Here there is attraction--affinity--but it is of
the soul.”

_Disembodied._--“Then there is no Love here! I mean the feeling
peculiar to the sexes.”

_Houri._--“Yes. But there is no _material_ desire. _The sexes are
essentially complements of each other_; but these complements may
differ in their substance and proportions. When they are counterparts
of each other, then affinity is perfect. This affinity is _heavenly
Love_ and unalloyed happiness. Such a pair are the Bride and
Bridegroom of Eternity. Their children are the heavenly _thoughts_
which spring from such affinity.”

The startled brain of the visionist caused him to awake into his dream,
and he saw his Immortal companion bending over him with a smile.




PART IV.


The dream changes; the _voyageurs_ are flying over Greece. This small
but wondrous nation, so remarkable in the annals of mankind, and so
full of historic and classic associations, was seen by them as in one
view of its ancient and modern times, and of its geographic and art
attractions under the illumination of genius and heroism, or in the
twilight of mental and moral decadence.

The Immortal remarked, as it faded in the rear from their sight, “This
favored land, emerging as it is, again, from the contact and influence
of barbarism and moral depression, and with the native talents and
sprightliness of its race, throwing off their frivolity and supineness,
under the stimulating agencies of civilization now in contact with it,
is once more destined to appropriate distinction.”

_American._--“And yonder is Venice! Its romance has ever excited and
interested my imagination.”

_Immortal._--“Its history has been like a meteor; but in more ways than
one: it has dashed into obscurity! It may be of continued interest as a
locality and a city, but it can never, again, be a power.”

Italia! Oh, Italia! with what emotions, evolved from considerations
of the present as of the past, they approach thee! In a southerly
sweep they note the position of the ancient Brundusium, and gaze
upon Vesuvius, Pompeii and Naples. They move up the course of the
“yellow Tiber,” and at last, they hover over the “Eternal City.” They
descend into Rome! traverse its streets, visit its famed places and
sanctuaries, examine its ruins, think of its noted dead, observe its
new features and present people, and, more than all, ponder upon the
meaning of its history, its situation and its attitude. It is not
within the compass of this narrative to present the volume of feeling
and thoughts of the sleeper. In the Vatican and in the fane of St.
Peter’s, as he did after in St. Paul’s and in London, he ruminated on
the religion of civilization, and on the new speculations of infidel
philosophy. In the Coliseum he reflected upon the impulses and ways
of the populace. In the Forum he analyzed the systems of law and the
subtleties of eloquence. In Senate halls he eliminated the science,
the experiments, the élan of statesmanship, in both State and Church
matters. Within the classic area of the Seven Hills, Man had exhibited
every phase of his nature, inclination and power. Here Humanity had
been borne upon every wave of destiny, and had travelled upon every
highway and byway of fate, on earth. Rome is the epitome of the world’s
Past. Its mission is ended.

Moving northward the aerialists glance upon Pisa, Florence, Milan and
Mantua, the Po and the Adige. To gratify the curiosity of the American,
they divert and descend to the point where the Rubicon was passed, and
he thinks of Cesar, and of all the so-called Cesars, down to the last
Czar and Kaiser. They visit, also, the plain of Marengo, which assured
in power and prestige the true successor to Cesar, as _he_ had been
to Alexander--the third that made a trio of the world’s mental and
imperial masters.

Inasmuch as the travellers were threading the animate gallery of the
world, they gave but a glance at the art galleries of Italy. What was a
marble Venus or Apollo--what was a painting of the Transfiguration or
of a Madonna--what was the tower of Pisa or the cathedral of Milan, in
comparison with what they had seen!

_Immortal._--“Italy is still nearer to national regeneration, power and
influence than Greece. The full power of modern enlightenment will ere
long be felt there.”

_American._--“The names of Cavour and Mazzini are already enrolled on
the true roll of fame. And, too, the biographies of Rienzi and Lorenzo
the Magnificent are peculiarly attractive.”

This was said as they were observing the beauties of lakes Garda and
Como. From thence they bent their pinions for Vienna. They circled
it to view the fields made memorable by Sobieski and Napoleon. They
enter it; and a cold and silvery twilight seemed to prevail as if its
most consummate imperialism and refinement preferred the blinded and
curtained _salons_ of governmental and social civilization. In such
palatial halls were its Court; and there the _finesse_ of closet and
boudoir intrigue had attained to its most exquisite development in this
epoch. And the decorated white cloth coats of its costume delighted the
eyes, but were significant of hypocrisy to the brain, of the American.
Winged as he was, and probably because of it, he found temptations
addressed to both his head and heart. It was there thought that even
angels could be corrupted “on earth as in heaven.”

They seek the purer air of Switzerland and the Alps. They “did” Mont
Blanc and the Simplon, slid upon an avalanche, looked upon Geneva and
its lake, and thought of Tell, the Cantons, and Calvin. They next seat
themselves in human style on the deck of a steamer, and make the trip
of the ever disputable and picturesque Rhine. They dash off on wing to
Brussels, and imagining they hear the “sounds of revelry by night” and
“the cannon’s opening roar,” they ponder on Waterloo.

_American._--“Now for the dear old cliffs of Albion. Oh, Great Britain
and Ireland, land of my fathers, let me see thee!” Stretching their
wings in full sympathy and in joyous flight across the Channel, they
scan with loving and careful eye England, Scotland and Ireland. They
take in their all and every part and place; and terminate their British
tour in London. Everything indicated genuine maturity and stability.
Both the material and spiritual developments proclaim solid sense and
judicious cultivation. It is the only country in which the Past and
Present seem to blend and harmonize.

There is a Royal levee at St. James palace, and there all appear royal.
The British nobility and gentry! what a superb body of men and women!
What glorious types of the mental and physical--what exemplars of
education and refinement, character and tone! It is in Great Britain
that industry, honesty and intellect have acquired gold; and gold has
not debased but elevated humanity--has not disintegrated but cemented
the social elements.

They were graciously received by Majesty; and they congratulated the
Queen, not as sovereign, but as the royal representative of such
a nation. Her peers, with calm satisfaction and cordial dignity,
exclaimed, “That the just appreciation of the British people by native
white Americans, involved the highest compliment to both.”

The Lord Mayor took them in charge, visited with them the notable
places and buildings of London, and à l’Anglaise, entertained them
at a banquet. On the occasion the Premier, who was a guest, remarked
in his speech: “Great Britain, at last, although a monarchy in name
and form, is a republic in fact. Its government combines the more of
the advantages and the less of the disadvantages of the one-man power
and of the many-power, than that of any other nation does. Hence it
is, that the rights of the citizen equal those of even America, and
are more practically protected and left in undisturbed satisfaction,
politically and socially, than in any country in the world. There is
more nominal but less real personal liberty in the United States than
in England. Yet in these regards it is the just and proud boast and
boon of these two nations, that their peoples alone can be called free.”

_American._--“Is it because popular opinion in America is a tyrant
toward each individual, that Great Britain has the advantage in
practical, if not theoretical liberty?”

_Immortal._--“Yes. Settled law and not fluctuating opinion should
govern and protect.”

The good-byes are genial. While crossing the Straits of Dover for the
Continent, the Immortal said with emphasis:

“The Anglo-Saxons everywhere furnish the best wives and mothers of your
globe.”

La Belle France! Inimitable Paris! what a medley of expectations
attends upon visiting these centres of travel. They run the gamut of
pleasure from the exhilarating boards of the “light fantastic toe,”
to the arenas where learning and skill walk in solemn mental pomp,
and genius essays its wings for loftier flights from the heights of
knowledge. There the heart vibrates from all the phases of frivolity,
through the glows of vanity, love and ambition, to the glamours of
suicide.

They proceed to Versailles, and indulge in mocking criticisms upon its
costly and useless structures and empirical history.

They surveyed with care, Paris and its environs. They thought of it as
a communistic volcano or as the cradle of revolutions.

_Immortal._--“Blessed is the person or nation, who has a Faith, however
crude! But, in truth, the French have no faith of any stable or
guiding kind. Nor do they permit themselves to be either calm enough
to study or rational enough to understand the mission of Reason. They
do not truly apply it to either religion or government. Their women
are practically wiser than their men; in their domain of society the
former _have_ instituted a system of mere life. Both have some tangible
notions on the art of living on earth. Neither think very coherently
on the Beyond. Natural (not mental) Philosophy, in all its branches,
is their most successful sphere. Their German rivals surpass them in
mental speculations and innocuous transcendentalisms.”

They enter the Tuileries. The Emperor of the French expressed his
keen appreciation of the objects of their grand and adventurous tour.
With respectful earnestness he asked many questions in regard to
it; especially in relation to political developments. In reply to a
question by the American in reference to the assumptions of his own
dynasty, he asseverated that it was a Napoleonic conception, maxim and
design, “that the virtues and rights of the people could and should be
asserted under the one-man _representative_ power--that Imperialism and
Republicanism could be identicalized in and under governmental action.
That no other kind of government either suited or would satisfy the
French. And that he ever studied Great Britain and the United States as
among the leading examples before him, in devising the measures of his
action and the formulas of his policy.”

He, also, assigned this as a reason why he and his uncle had not been
favored by the old imperial or royal régimes. His Empress, the lovely
Eugenie, was marked in her gracious deference, and uttered some angelic
sentiments in support of her husband’s theory.

At Court the ethereal party received the attentions of the _savans_
of the world’s scientific metropolis, and with them visited their
meeting. Abstruse topics were discussed. In reply to an inquiry upon
electricity, the Immortal intimated “that, although it was not his
province to discuss the connection between mind and matter, or to
expound what agency magnetism had in relation to it, yet as the brain
and body of man were a series of electric batteries, and electricity
a fluid that pervaded the earth, it would in time, by an effort of
the will, and by an action of the human body under and in certain
conditions, become a medium of thought and converse between any two
persons at different spots on the earth.”

_American._--“Will they hold conversations as if in a tête-à-tête?”

_Immortal._--“Yes. Without using language, Americans will thus converse
with Chinese.”

They visited in the _Invalides_ the Tomb of Napoléon le Grand. Before
it the American was irresistibly affected by the awe, wonder and
curiosity, which may be felt for the majesty of mind.

The travellers now proceed to Bordeaux; where, seated in a _salon_, and
the American being thirsty, the best brandy and claret are set before
them. They taste them with relish, and discuss their merits.

Suddenly the Disembodied exclaims, “Day is approaching, I must return
to my body. Let us fly.”

They once more essay the aerial passage of the Atlantic. At the
instance of the Spirit of Morphine, who suggested that they had
time for a swoop to south of the Equator, and for a view of the
constellation of the Southern Cross, the American, who affected
astronomy, readily assented. They whirl southward, see it, and repass
“the Line.” They enter the United States at Savannah, and soon reach
the abode of the sleeper in the upper part of South Carolina. His
spirit enters his chamber through the window and glides into his
body, when he experiences a sense of relief as to its safety, and of
satisfaction in his wondrous trip. He nestles in comfort of thought and
matter, and--AWAKES!

The day has dawned, and soon the rays of the rising sun greet his
mortal eyes. During that day he spoke of the dream, and was pale and
excited. This dream occurred in the early part of January, 1868, and
lasted between nine and ten hours.




FOOTNOTES:


[A] This sea was then unknown to the dreamer. His dream revealed to
him its existence. He thought it a delusion, until he heard of its
discovery.

[B] This refers to the once famous palace, built of blocks of ice, in
St. Petersburg.




TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES:


  Italicized text is surrounded by underscores: _italics_.

  Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.

  Inconsistencies in hyphenation have been standardized.




*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE DREAM-GOD ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
